docs/extensions/resources/worker.md, before:

# Contract: `Worker` Resource

While the control plane of a shoot cluster is living in the seed and deployed as native Kubernetes workload, the worker nodes of the shoot clusters are normal virtual machines (VMs) in the end-users infrastructure account.
The Gardener project features a sub-project called [machine-controller-manager](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager).
This controller is extending the Kubernetes API using custom resource definitions to represent actual VMs as `Machine` objects inside a Kubernetes system.
This approach unlocks the possibility to manage virtual machines in the Kubernetes style and benefit from all its design principles.

## What is the machine-controller-manager doing exactly?

Generally, there are provider-specific `MachineClass` objects (`AWSMachineClass`, `AzureMachineClass`, etc.; similar to `StorageClass`), and `MachineDeployment`, `MachineSet`, and `Machine` objects (similar to `Deployment`, `ReplicaSet`, and `Pod`).
A machine class describes **where** and **how** to create virtual machines (in which networks, region, availability zone, SSH key, user-data for bootstrapping, etc.), while a `Machine` results in an actual virtual machine.
You can read up [more information](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager) in the machine-controller-manager's [repository](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager).

The `gardenlet` deploys the `machine-controller-manager`, hence, provider extensions only have to inject their specific out-of-tree `machine-controller-manager` sidecar container into the `Deployment`.

## What needs to be implemented to support a new worker provider?

As part of the shoot flow Gardener will create a special CRD in the seed cluster that needs to be reconciled by an extension controller, for example:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Worker
metadata:
  name: bar
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  type: azure
  region: eu-west-1
  secretRef:
    name: cloudprovider
    namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  infrastructureProviderStatus:
    apiVersion: aws.provider.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: InfrastructureStatus
    ec2:
      keyName: shoot--foo--bar-ssh-publickey
    iam:
      instanceProfiles:
      - name: shoot--foo--bar-nodes
        purpose: nodes
      roles:
      - arn: arn:aws:iam::0123456789:role/shoot--foo--bar-nodes
        purpose: nodes
    vpc:
      id: vpc-0123456789
      securityGroups:
      - id: sg-1234567890
        purpose: nodes
      subnets:
      - id: subnet-01234
        purpose: nodes
        zone: eu-west-1b
      - id: subnet-56789
        purpose: public
        zone: eu-west-1b
      - id: subnet-0123a
        purpose: nodes
        zone: eu-west-1c
      - id: subnet-5678a
        purpose: public
        zone: eu-west-1c
  pools:
  - name: cpu-worker
    minimum: 3
    maximum: 5
    maxSurge: 1
    maxUnavailable: 0
    machineType: m4.large
    machineImage:
      name: coreos
      version: 1967.5.0
    nodeAgentSecretName: gardener-node-agent-local-ee46034b8269353b
    nodeTemplate:
      capacity:
        cpu: 2
        gpu: 0
        memory: 8Gi
    labels:
      node.kubernetes.io/role: node
      worker.gardener.cloud/cri-name: containerd
      worker.gardener.cloud/pool: cpu-worker
      worker.gardener.cloud/system-components: "true"
    userDataSecretRef:
      name: user-data-secret
      key: cloud_config
    volume:
      size: 20Gi
      type: gp2
    zones:
    - eu-west-1b
    - eu-west-1c
    machineControllerManager:
      drainTimeout: 10m
      healthTimeout: 10m
      creationTimeout: 10m
      maxEvictRetries: 30
      nodeConditions:
      - ReadonlyFilesystem
      - DiskPressure
      - KernelDeadlock
    clusterAutoscaler:
      scaleDownUtilizationThreshold: 0.5
      scaleDownGpuUtilizationThreshold: 0.5
      scaleDownUnneededTime: 30m
      scaleDownUnreadyTime: 1h
      maxNodeProvisionTime: 15m
```

The `.spec.secretRef` contains a reference to the provider secret pointing to the account that shall be used to create the needed virtual machines.
Also, as you can see, Gardener copies the output of the infrastructure creation (`.spec.infrastructureProviderStatus`, see [`Infrastructure` resource](./infrastructure.md)), into the `.spec`.

In the `.spec.pools[]` field, the desired worker pools are listed.
In the above example, one pool with machine type `m4.large` and `min=3`, `max=5` machines shall be spread over two availability zones (`eu-west-1b`, `eu-west-1c`).
This information together with the infrastructure status must be used to determine the proper configuration for the machine classes.

The `spec.pools[].labels` map contains all labels that should be added to all nodes of the corresponding worker pool.
Gardener configures kubelet's `--node-labels` flag to contain all labels that are mentioned here and allowed by the [`NodeRestriction` admission plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#noderestriction).
This makes sure that kubelet adds all user-specified and gardener-managed labels to the new `Node` object when registering a new machine with the API server.
Nevertheless, this is only effective when bootstrapping new nodes.
The provider extension (respectively, machine-controller-manager) is still responsible for updating the labels of existing `Nodes` when the worker specification changes.

The `spec.pools[].nodeTemplate.capacity` field contains the resource information of the machine like `cpu`, `gpu`, and `memory`. This info is used by Cluster Autoscaler to generate `nodeTemplate` during scaling the `nodeGroup` from zero.

The `spec.pools[].machineControllerManager` field allows to configure the settings for machine-controller-manager component. Providers must populate these settings on worker-pool to the related [fields](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager/blob/master/kubernetes/machine_objects/machine-deployment.yaml#L30-L34) in MachineDeployment.

The `spec.pools[].clusterAutoscaler` field contains `cluster-autoscaler` settings that are to be applied only to specific worker group. `cluster-autoscaler` expects to find these settings as annotations on the `MachineDeployment`, and so providers must pass these values to the corresponding `MachineDeployment` via annotations. The keys for these annotations can be found [here](../../../pkg/apis/extensions/v1alpha1/types_worker.go) and the values for the corresponding annotations should be the same as what is passed into the field. Providers can use the helper function [`extensionsv1alpha1helper.GetMachineDeploymentClusterAutoscalerAnnotations`](../../../pkg/apis/extensions/v1alpha1/helper/worker.go) that returns the annotation map to be used.

The controller must only inject its provider-specific sidecar container into the `machine-controller-manager` `Deployment` managed by `gardenlet`.

After that, it must compute the desired machine classes and the desired machine deployments.
Typically, one class maps to one deployment, and one class/deployment is created per availability zone.
Following this convention, the created resource would look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  labels:
    gardener.cloud/purpose: machineclass
type: Opaque
data:
  providerAccessKeyId: eW91ci1hd3MtYWNjZXNzLWtleS1pZAo=
  providerSecretAccessKey: eW91ci1hd3Mtc2VjcmV0LWFjY2Vzcy1rZXkK
  userData: c29tZSBkYXRhIHRvIGJvb3RzdHJhcCB0aGUgVk0K
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: AWSMachineClass
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  ami: ami-0123456789 # Your controller must map the stated version to the provider specific machine image information, in the AWS case the AMI.
  blockDevices:
  - ebs:
      volumeSize: 20
      volumeType: gp2
  iam:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-nodes
  keyName: shoot--foo--bar-ssh-publickey
  machineType: m4.large
  networkInterfaces:
  - securityGroupIDs:
    - sg-1234567890
    subnetID: subnet-01234
  region: eu-west-1
  secretRef:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
    namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  tags:
    kubernetes.io/cluster/shoot--foo--bar: "1"
    kubernetes.io/role/node: "1"
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: MachineDeployment
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  strategy:
    type: RollingUpdate
    rollingUpdate:
      maxSurge: 1
      maxUnavailable: 0
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
    spec:
      class:
        kind: AWSMachineClass
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
```

for the first availability zone `eu-west-1b`, and

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  labels:
    gardener.cloud/purpose: machineclass
type: Opaque
data:
  providerAccessKeyId: eW91ci1hd3MtYWNjZXNzLWtleS1pZAo=
  providerSecretAccessKey: eW91ci1hd3Mtc2VjcmV0LWFjY2Vzcy1rZXkK
  userData: c29tZSBkYXRhIHRvIGJvb3RzdHJhcCB0aGUgVk0K
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: AWSMachineClass
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  ami: ami-0123456789 # Your controller must map the stated version to the provider specific machine image information, in the AWS case the AMI.
  blockDevices:
  - ebs:
      volumeSize: 20
      volumeType: gp2
  iam:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-nodes
  keyName: shoot--foo--bar-ssh-publickey
  machineType: m4.large
  networkInterfaces:
  - securityGroupIDs:
    - sg-1234567890
    subnetID: subnet-0123a
  region: eu-west-1
  secretRef:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
    namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  tags:
    kubernetes.io/cluster/shoot--foo--bar: "1"
    kubernetes.io/role/node: "1"
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: MachineDeployment
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  strategy:
    type: RollingUpdate
    rollingUpdate:
      maxSurge: 1
      maxUnavailable: 0
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
    spec:
      class:
        kind: AWSMachineClass
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
```

for the second availability zone `eu-west-1c`.

Another convention is the 5-letter hash at the end of the machine class names.
Most controllers compute a checksum out of the specification of the machine class.
Any change to the value of the `nodeAgentSecretName` field must result in a change of the machine class name.
The checksum in the machine class name helps to trigger a rolling update of the worker nodes if, for example, the machine image version changes.
In this case, a new checksum will be generated which results in the creation of a new machine class.
The `MachineDeployment`'s machine class reference (`.spec.template.spec.class.name`) is updated, which triggers the rolling update process in the machine-controller-manager.
However, all of this is only a convention that eases writing the controller, but you can do it completely differently if you desire - as long as you make sure that the described behaviours are implemented correctly.

After the machine classes and machine deployments have been created, the machine-controller-manager will start talking to the provider's IaaS API and create the virtual machines.
Gardener makes sure that the content of the `Secret` referenced in the `userDataSecretRef` field that is used to bootstrap the machines contains the required configuration for installation of the kubelet and registering the VM as worker node in the shoot cluster.
The `Worker` extension controller shall wait until all the created `MachineDeployment`s indicate healthiness/readiness before it ends the control loop.

## Does Gardener need some information that must be returned back?

Another important benefit of the machine-controller-manager's design principles (extending the Kubernetes API using CRDs) is that the [cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler) can be used **without** any provider-specific implementation.
We have forked the [upstream Kubernetes community's cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/cluster-autoscaler) and extended it so that it understands the machine API.
Definitely, we will merge it back into the community's versions once it has been adapted properly.

Our cluster-autoscaler only needs to know the minimum and maximum number of replicas **per** `MachineDeployment` and is ready to act. Without knowing that, it needs to talk to the provider APIs (it just modifies the `.spec.replicas` field in the `MachineDeployment` object).
Gardener deploys this autoscaler if there is at least one worker pool that specifies `max>min`.
In order to know how it needs to configure it, the provider-specific `Worker` extension controller must expose which `MachineDeployment`s it has created and how the `min`/`max` numbers should look like.

Consequently, your controller should write this information into the `Worker` resource's `.status.machineDeployments` field. It should also update the `.status.machineDeploymentsLastUpdateTime` field along with `.status.machineDeployments`, so that gardener is able to deploy Cluster-Autoscaler right after the status is updated with the latest `MachineDeployment`s and does not wait for the reconciliation to be completed:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Worker
metadata:
  name: worker
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  ...
status:
  lastOperation: ...
  machineDeployments:
  - name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
    minimum: 2
    maximum: 3
  - name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2
    minimum: 1
    maximum: 2
  machineDeploymentsLastUpdateTime: "2023-05-01T12:44:27Z"
```

In order to support a new worker provider, you need to write a controller that watches all `Worker`s with `.spec.type=<my-provider-name>`.
You can take a look at the below referenced example implementation for the AWS provider.

## That sounds like a lot that needs to be done, can you help me?

All of the described behaviour is mostly the same for every provider.
The only difference is maybe the version/configuration of the provider-specific `machine-controller-manager` sidecar container, and the machine class specification itself.
You can take a look at our [extension library](../../../extensions), especially the [worker controller](../../../extensions/pkg/controller/worker) part where you will find a lot of utilities that you can use.
Note that there are also utility functions for getting the default sidecar container specification or corresponding VPA container policy in the [`machinecontrollermanager` package](../../../pkg/component/nodemanagement/machinecontrollermanager) called `ProviderSidecarContainer` and `ProviderSidecarVPAContainerPolicy`.
Also, using the library you only need to implement your provider specifics - all the things that can be handled generically can be taken for free and do not need to be re-implemented.
Take a look at the [AWS worker controller](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/tree/master/pkg/controller/worker) for finding an example.

## Non-provider specific information required for worker creation

All the providers require further information that is not provider specific but already part of the shoot resource.
One example for such information is whether the shoot is hibernated or not.
In this case, all the virtual machines should be deleted/terminated, and after that the machine controller-manager should be scaled down.
You can take a look at the [AWS worker controller](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/tree/master/pkg/controller/worker) to see how it reads this information and how it is used.
As Gardener cannot know which information is required by providers, it simply mirrors the `Shoot`, `Seed`, and `CloudProfile` resources into the seed.
They are part of the [`Cluster` extension resource](../cluster.md) and can be used to extract information that is not part of the `Worker` resource itself.

## References and Additional Resources

* [`Worker` API (Golang Specification)](../../../pkg/apis/extensions/v1alpha1/types_worker.go)
* [Extension Controller Library](../../../extensions/)
* [Generic Worker Controller](../../../extensions/pkg/controller/worker)
* [Exemplary Implementation for the AWS Provider](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/tree/master/pkg/controller/worker)

Commit message:

new doc for spec.pools[].nodeTemplate.virtualCapacity

docs/extensions/resources/worker.md, after:

# Contract: `Worker` Resource

While the control plane of a shoot cluster is living in the seed and deployed as native Kubernetes workload, the worker nodes of the shoot clusters are normal virtual machines (VMs) in the end-users infrastructure account.
The Gardener project features a sub-project called [machine-controller-manager](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager).
This controller is extending the Kubernetes API using custom resource definitions to represent actual VMs as `Machine` objects inside a Kubernetes system.
This approach unlocks the possibility to manage virtual machines in the Kubernetes style and benefit from all its design principles.

## What is the machine-controller-manager doing exactly?

Generally, there are provider-specific `MachineClass` objects (`AWSMachineClass`, `AzureMachineClass`, etc.; similar to `StorageClass`), and `MachineDeployment`, `MachineSet`, and `Machine` objects (similar to `Deployment`, `ReplicaSet`, and `Pod`).
A machine class describes **where** and **how** to create virtual machines (in which networks, region, availability zone, SSH key, user-data for bootstrapping, etc.), while a `Machine` results in an actual virtual machine.
You can read up [more information](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager) in the machine-controller-manager's [repository](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager).

The `gardenlet` deploys the `machine-controller-manager`, hence, provider extensions only have to inject their specific out-of-tree `machine-controller-manager` sidecar container into the `Deployment`.

## What needs to be implemented to support a new worker provider?

As part of the shoot flow Gardener will create a special CRD in the seed cluster that needs to be reconciled by an extension controller, for example:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Worker
metadata:
  name: bar
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  type: azure
  region: eu-west-1
  secretRef:
    name: cloudprovider
    namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  infrastructureProviderStatus:
    apiVersion: aws.provider.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: InfrastructureStatus
    ec2:
      keyName: shoot--foo--bar-ssh-publickey
    iam:
      instanceProfiles:
      - name: shoot--foo--bar-nodes
        purpose: nodes
      roles:
      - arn: arn:aws:iam::0123456789:role/shoot--foo--bar-nodes
        purpose: nodes
    vpc:
      id: vpc-0123456789
      securityGroups:
      - id: sg-1234567890
        purpose: nodes
      subnets:
      - id: subnet-01234
        purpose: nodes
        zone: eu-west-1b
      - id: subnet-56789
        purpose: public
        zone: eu-west-1b
      - id: subnet-0123a
        purpose: nodes
        zone: eu-west-1c
      - id: subnet-5678a
        purpose: public
        zone: eu-west-1c
  pools:
  - name: cpu-worker
    minimum: 3
    maximum: 5
    maxSurge: 1
    maxUnavailable: 0
    machineType: m4.large
    machineImage:
      name: coreos
      version: 1967.5.0
    nodeAgentSecretName: gardener-node-agent-local-ee46034b8269353b
    nodeTemplate:
      capacity:
        cpu: 2
        gpu: 0
        memory: 8Gi
      virtualCapacity: 
        hc.hana.com/memory: 1234567
    labels:
      node.kubernetes.io/role: node
      worker.gardener.cloud/cri-name: containerd
      worker.gardener.cloud/pool: cpu-worker
      worker.gardener.cloud/system-components: "true"
    userDataSecretRef:
      name: user-data-secret
      key: cloud_config
    volume:
      size: 20Gi
      type: gp2
    zones:
    - eu-west-1b
    - eu-west-1c
    machineControllerManager:
      drainTimeout: 10m
      healthTimeout: 10m
      creationTimeout: 10m
      maxEvictRetries: 30
      nodeConditions:
      - ReadonlyFilesystem
      - DiskPressure
      - KernelDeadlock
    clusterAutoscaler:
      scaleDownUtilizationThreshold: 0.5
      scaleDownGpuUtilizationThreshold: 0.5
      scaleDownUnneededTime: 30m
      scaleDownUnreadyTime: 1h
      maxNodeProvisionTime: 15m
```

The `.spec.secretRef` contains a reference to the provider secret pointing to the account that shall be used to create the needed virtual machines.
Also, as you can see, Gardener copies the output of the infrastructure creation (`.spec.infrastructureProviderStatus`, see [`Infrastructure` resource](./infrastructure.md)), into the `.spec`.

In the `.spec.pools[]` field, the desired worker pools are listed.
In the above example, one pool with machine type `m4.large` and `min=3`, `max=5` machines shall be spread over two availability zones (`eu-west-1b`, `eu-west-1c`).
This information together with the infrastructure status must be used to determine the proper configuration for the machine classes.

The `spec.pools[].labels` map contains all labels that should be added to all nodes of the corresponding worker pool.
Gardener configures kubelet's `--node-labels` flag to contain all labels that are mentioned here and allowed by the [`NodeRestriction` admission plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#noderestriction).
This makes sure that kubelet adds all user-specified and gardener-managed labels to the new `Node` object when registering a new machine with the API server.
Nevertheless, this is only effective when bootstrapping new nodes.
The provider extension (respectively, machine-controller-manager) is still responsible for updating the labels of existing `Nodes` when the worker specification changes.

The `spec.pools[].nodeTemplate.capacity` field contains the resource information of the machine like `cpu`, `gpu`, and `memory`. This info is used by Cluster Autoscaler to generate `nodeTemplate` during scaling the `nodeGroup` from zero.

The `spec.pools[].nodeTemplate.virtualCapacity` field contains the _virtual_ resource information associated with the machine and used to specify extended resources that are _virtual_ in nature (For specifying real, provisionable resources `nodeTemplate.capacity` should be used). This will be applied to the machine class `nodeTemplate` without triggering a rollout of the cluster and will be  used by Cluster Autoscaler for scaling the `nodeGroup` from zero.

The `spec.pools[].machineControllerManager` field allows to configure the settings for machine-controller-manager component. Providers must populate these settings on worker-pool to the related [fields](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager/blob/master/kubernetes/machine_objects/machine-deployment.yaml#L30-L34) in MachineDeployment.

The `spec.pools[].clusterAutoscaler` field contains `cluster-autoscaler` settings that are to be applied only to specific worker group. `cluster-autoscaler` expects to find these settings as annotations on the `MachineDeployment`, and so providers must pass these values to the corresponding `MachineDeployment` via annotations. The keys for these annotations can be found [here](../../../pkg/apis/extensions/v1alpha1/types_worker.go) and the values for the corresponding annotations should be the same as what is passed into the field. Providers can use the helper function [`extensionsv1alpha1helper.GetMachineDeploymentClusterAutoscalerAnnotations`](../../../pkg/apis/extensions/v1alpha1/helper/worker.go) that returns the annotation map to be used.

The controller must only inject its provider-specific sidecar container into the `machine-controller-manager` `Deployment` managed by `gardenlet`.

After that, it must compute the desired machine classes and the desired machine deployments.
Typically, one class maps to one deployment, and one class/deployment is created per availability zone.
Following this convention, the created resource would look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  labels:
    gardener.cloud/purpose: machineclass
type: Opaque
data:
  providerAccessKeyId: eW91ci1hd3MtYWNjZXNzLWtleS1pZAo=
  providerSecretAccessKey: eW91ci1hd3Mtc2VjcmV0LWFjY2Vzcy1rZXkK
  userData: c29tZSBkYXRhIHRvIGJvb3RzdHJhcCB0aGUgVk0K
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: AWSMachineClass
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  ami: ami-0123456789 # Your controller must map the stated version to the provider specific machine image information, in the AWS case the AMI.
  blockDevices:
  - ebs:
      volumeSize: 20
      volumeType: gp2
  iam:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-nodes
  keyName: shoot--foo--bar-ssh-publickey
  machineType: m4.large
  networkInterfaces:
  - securityGroupIDs:
    - sg-1234567890
    subnetID: subnet-01234
  region: eu-west-1
  secretRef:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
    namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  tags:
    kubernetes.io/cluster/shoot--foo--bar: "1"
    kubernetes.io/role/node: "1"
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: MachineDeployment
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  strategy:
    type: RollingUpdate
    rollingUpdate:
      maxSurge: 1
      maxUnavailable: 0
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
    spec:
      class:
        kind: AWSMachineClass
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1-3db65
```

for the first availability zone `eu-west-1b`, and

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  labels:
    gardener.cloud/purpose: machineclass
type: Opaque
data:
  providerAccessKeyId: eW91ci1hd3MtYWNjZXNzLWtleS1pZAo=
  providerSecretAccessKey: eW91ci1hd3Mtc2VjcmV0LWFjY2Vzcy1rZXkK
  userData: c29tZSBkYXRhIHRvIGJvb3RzdHJhcCB0aGUgVk0K
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: AWSMachineClass
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  ami: ami-0123456789 # Your controller must map the stated version to the provider specific machine image information, in the AWS case the AMI.
  blockDevices:
  - ebs:
      volumeSize: 20
      volumeType: gp2
  iam:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-nodes
  keyName: shoot--foo--bar-ssh-publickey
  machineType: m4.large
  networkInterfaces:
  - securityGroupIDs:
    - sg-1234567890
    subnetID: subnet-0123a
  region: eu-west-1
  secretRef:
    name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
    namespace: shoot--foo--bar
  tags:
    kubernetes.io/cluster/shoot--foo--bar: "1"
    kubernetes.io/role/node: "1"
---
apiVersion: machine.sapcloud.io/v1alpha1
kind: MachineDeployment
metadata:
  name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
  strategy:
    type: RollingUpdate
    rollingUpdate:
      maxSurge: 1
      maxUnavailable: 0
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
    spec:
      class:
        kind: AWSMachineClass
        name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2-5z6as
```

for the second availability zone `eu-west-1c`.

Another convention is the 5-letter hash at the end of the machine class names.
Most controllers compute a checksum out of the specification of the machine class.
Any change to the value of the `nodeAgentSecretName` field must result in a change of the machine class name.
The checksum in the machine class name helps to trigger a rolling update of the worker nodes if, for example, the machine image version changes.
In this case, a new checksum will be generated which results in the creation of a new machine class.
The `MachineDeployment`'s machine class reference (`.spec.template.spec.class.name`) is updated, which triggers the rolling update process in the machine-controller-manager.
However, all of this is only a convention that eases writing the controller, but you can do it completely differently if you desire - as long as you make sure that the described behaviours are implemented correctly.

After the machine classes and machine deployments have been created, the machine-controller-manager will start talking to the provider's IaaS API and create the virtual machines.
Gardener makes sure that the content of the `Secret` referenced in the `userDataSecretRef` field that is used to bootstrap the machines contains the required configuration for installation of the kubelet and registering the VM as worker node in the shoot cluster.
The `Worker` extension controller shall wait until all the created `MachineDeployment`s indicate healthiness/readiness before it ends the control loop.

## Does Gardener need some information that must be returned back?

Another important benefit of the machine-controller-manager's design principles (extending the Kubernetes API using CRDs) is that the [cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler) can be used **without** any provider-specific implementation.
We have forked the [upstream Kubernetes community's cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/cluster-autoscaler) and extended it so that it understands the machine API.
Definitely, we will merge it back into the community's versions once it has been adapted properly.

Our cluster-autoscaler only needs to know the minimum and maximum number of replicas **per** `MachineDeployment` and is ready to act. Without knowing that, it needs to talk to the provider APIs (it just modifies the `.spec.replicas` field in the `MachineDeployment` object).
Gardener deploys this autoscaler if there is at least one worker pool that specifies `max>min`.
In order to know how it needs to configure it, the provider-specific `Worker` extension controller must expose which `MachineDeployment`s it has created and how the `min`/`max` numbers should look like.

Consequently, your controller should write this information into the `Worker` resource's `.status.machineDeployments` field. It should also update the `.status.machineDeploymentsLastUpdateTime` field along with `.status.machineDeployments`, so that gardener is able to deploy Cluster-Autoscaler right after the status is updated with the latest `MachineDeployment`s and does not wait for the reconciliation to be completed:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Worker
metadata:
  name: worker
  namespace: shoot--foo--bar
spec:
  ...
status:
  lastOperation: ...
  machineDeployments:
  - name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z1
    minimum: 2
    maximum: 3
  - name: shoot--foo--bar-cpu-worker-z2
    minimum: 1
    maximum: 2
  machineDeploymentsLastUpdateTime: "2023-05-01T12:44:27Z"
```

In order to support a new worker provider, you need to write a controller that watches all `Worker`s with `.spec.type=<my-provider-name>`.
You can take a look at the below referenced example implementation for the AWS provider.

## That sounds like a lot that needs to be done, can you help me?

All of the described behaviour is mostly the same for every provider.
The only difference is maybe the version/configuration of the provider-specific `machine-controller-manager` sidecar container, and the machine class specification itself.
You can take a look at our [extension library](../../../extensions), especially the [worker controller](../../../extensions/pkg/controller/worker) part where you will find a lot of utilities that you can use.
Note that there are also utility functions for getting the default sidecar container specification or corresponding VPA container policy in the [`machinecontrollermanager` package](../../../pkg/component/nodemanagement/machinecontrollermanager) called `ProviderSidecarContainer` and `ProviderSidecarVPAContainerPolicy`.
Also, using the library you only need to implement your provider specifics - all the things that can be handled generically can be taken for free and do not need to be re-implemented.
Take a look at the [AWS worker controller](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/tree/master/pkg/controller/worker) for finding an example.

## Non-provider specific information required for worker creation

All the providers require further information that is not provider specific but already part of the shoot resource.
One example for such information is whether the shoot is hibernated or not.
In this case, all the virtual machines should be deleted/terminated, and after that the machine controller-manager should be scaled down.
You can take a look at the [AWS worker controller](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/tree/master/pkg/controller/worker) to see how it reads this information and how it is used.
As Gardener cannot know which information is required by providers, it simply mirrors the `Shoot`, `Seed`, and `CloudProfile` resources into the seed.
They are part of the [`Cluster` extension resource](../cluster.md) and can be used to extract information that is not part of the `Worker` resource itself.

## References and Additional Resources

* [`Worker` API (Golang Specification)](../../../pkg/apis/extensions/v1alpha1/types_worker.go)
* [Extension Controller Library](../../../extensions/)
* [Generic Worker Controller](../../../extensions/pkg/controller/worker)
* [Exemplary Implementation for the AWS Provider](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/tree/master/pkg/controller/worker)
