docs/operations/kube_apiserver_loadbalancing.md, before:

# Kube API server load balancing

Load balancing for shoot and garden Kube API servers leverages the [Gardener Istio deployment](istio.md).

In default mode Istio performs L4 load balancing. Istio distributes connections to Kube API servers preferably in the
same zone ([Topology-Aware Traffic Routing](topology_aware_routing.md#topology-aware-services-in-the-seed-cluster)).
Requests are not taken into account for a load balancing decisions. TLS is terminated by Kube API server instances.  

There is a second mode which can be activated via `IstioTLSTermination` feature gate in `gardenlet` and `gardener-operator`.
This mode introduces L7 load balancing and distributes requests among the Kube API server instances.
It does not use [Topology-Aware Traffic Routing](topology_aware_routing.md) since it contradicts the load balancing goal.
In this mode TLS is terminated in Istio. However, Istio creates a TLS connection to Kube API servers, too, so the
traffic within the cluster remains encrypted.

This document is focused on the second mode.

The minimum version of Kube API server (for virtual garden and shoot) is v1.31.0. Starting with this version the Kube API
server uses the WebSocket protocol instead of SPDY for streaming APIs ([ref](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/08/20/websockets-transition/)).
Envoy cannot upgrade the connection from HTTP to SPDY ([ref](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/36469)).  
Thus, for shoots and gardens using lower versions L7 load balancing remains deactivated even when the feature gate is enabled.  
On eligible shoots L7 load balancing is activated by default. However, it can be deactivated by annotating the shoot with
`shoot.gardener.cloud/disable-istio-tls-termination: "true"`.  
The same logic applies to `kubectl` tool. Thus, please use `kubectl` v1.31.0 or higher if you want to access a Kube API
server with L7 load balancing.

## How it works

L7 load balancing works for the externally resolvable Kube API server endpoints and for connections which use
`apiserver-proxy` like endpoint `kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local`.

Clients might authenticate at Kube API server using client certificates, tokens or might connect unauthenticated. In the
first case Istio ingress gateway must validate client certificates because it terminates the TLS connection. Thus, it is
configured with an optional mutual TLS authentication. It is optional because in case of the authentication via token,
the token is validated by Kube API server. Unauthenticated requests are handled by Kube API server too. For TLS
termination and client certificate validation Kube API server certificate (including the private key) and the client CA
bundle must be synchronized into the namespace where istio ingress gateway is running.

While token authentication and unauthenticated requests are still handled by Kube API server itself, it requires
[dedicated request headers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#authenticating-proxy)
if an authentication proxy is used. Based on these headers Kube API server identifies the user and group of a request.
They are added with a lua script running in an envoy filter in istio ingress gateway. Kube API server trusts the headers
set by the authentication proxy so it requires an mTLS connection to the proxy. Istio uses the front proxy CA
(including private key) and the server CA bundle to establish the mTLS connection. These secrets again must be synchronized
into the namespace where istio ingress gateway is running. There is an own istio destination rule for the mTLS connection.

The destination host of the istio virtual service has an istio destination rule which does not use mTLS so that Kube API
server authenticates requests by itself. It is used for the token based authentication. The istio destination rule for
the mTLS connection is set by the lua script mentioned above only. This is a safety net to prevent that requests can
reach Kube API server via the trusted connection in case the lua scripts fails for some reason.

The flow for L7 load balancing is shown in the following illustration.

![L7 load-balancing](./images/l7-load-balancing.png)

Commit message:

Add SPDY support for L7 load balancing (#11807)
* Activate L7 load-balancing independently from Kubernetes version

* Fix SNI in `DestinationRule` for TLS termination

Ensure it is set to a name which is part of any kube-apiserver certificate.

* Add support to upgrade connections to SPDY

* Update documentation

* Address PR review feedback

docs/operations/kube_apiserver_loadbalancing.md, after:

# Kube API server load balancing

Load balancing for shoot and garden Kube API servers leverages the [Gardener Istio deployment](istio.md).

In default mode Istio performs L4 load balancing. Istio distributes connections to Kube API servers preferably in the
same zone ([Topology-Aware Traffic Routing](topology_aware_routing.md#topology-aware-services-in-the-seed-cluster)).
Requests are not taken into account for a load balancing decisions. TLS is terminated by Kube API server instances.  

There is a second mode which can be activated via `IstioTLSTermination` feature gate in `gardenlet` and `gardener-operator`.
This mode introduces L7 load balancing and distributes requests among the Kube API server instances.
It does not use [Topology-Aware Traffic Routing](topology_aware_routing.md) since it contradicts the load balancing goal.
In this mode TLS is terminated in Istio. However, Istio creates a TLS connection to Kube API servers, too, so the
traffic within the cluster remains encrypted.

This document is focused on the second mode.

On seeds where the feature gate is activated L7 load balancing can still be deactivated for single shoots by annotating
them with `shoot.gardener.cloud/disable-istio-tls-termination: "true"`.

## How it works

L7 load balancing works for the externally resolvable Kube API server endpoints and for connections which use
`apiserver-proxy` like endpoint `kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local`.

Clients might authenticate at Kube API server using client certificates, tokens or might connect unauthenticated. In the
first case Istio ingress gateway must validate client certificates because it terminates the TLS connection. Thus, it is
configured with an optional mutual TLS authentication. It is optional because in case of the authentication via token,
the token is validated by Kube API server. Unauthenticated requests are handled by Kube API server too. For TLS
termination and client certificate validation Kube API server certificate (including the private key) and the client CA
bundle must be synchronized into the namespace where istio ingress gateway is running.

While token authentication and unauthenticated requests are still handled by Kube API server itself, it requires
[dedicated request headers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#authenticating-proxy)
if an authentication proxy is used. Based on these headers Kube API server identifies the user and group of a request.
They are added with a lua script running in an envoy filter in istio ingress gateway. Kube API server trusts the headers
set by the authentication proxy so it requires an mTLS connection to the proxy. Istio uses the front proxy CA
(including private key) and the server CA bundle to establish the mTLS connection. These secrets again must be synchronized
into the namespace where istio ingress gateway is running. There is an own istio destination rule for the mTLS connection.

The destination host of the istio virtual service has an istio destination rule which does not use mTLS so that Kube API
server authenticates requests by itself. It is used for the token based authentication. The istio destination rule for
the mTLS connection is set by the lua script mentioned above only. This is a safety net to prevent that requests can
reach Kube API server via the trusted connection in case the lua scripts fails for some reason.

The flow for L7 load balancing is shown in the following illustration.

![L7 load-balancing](./images/l7-load-balancing.png)
