docs/extensions/referenced-resources.md, before:

# Referenced Resources

The Shoot resource can include a list of resources (usually secrets) that can be referenced by name in the extension `providerConfig` and other Shoot sections, for example:

```yaml
kind: Shoot
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
metadata:
  name: crazy-botany
  namespace: garden-dev
  ...
spec:
  ...
  extensions:
  - type: foobar
    providerConfig:
      apiVersion: foobar.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
      kind: FooBarConfig
      foo: bar
      secretRef: foobar-secret
  resources:
  - name: foobar-secret
    resourceRef:
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: Secret
      name: my-foobar-secret
```

Gardener expects to find these referenced resources in the project namespace (e.g., `garden-dev`) and will copy them to the Shoot namespace in the Seed cluster when reconciling a Shoot, adding a prefix to their names to avoid naming collisions with Gardener's own resources.

Extension controllers can resolve the references to these resources by accessing the Shoot via the `Cluster` resource. To properly read a referenced resources, extension controllers should use the utility function `GetObjectByReference` from the `extensions/pkg/controller` package, for example:

```go
    ...
    ref = &autoscalingv1.CrossVersionObjectReference{
        APIVersion: "v1",
        Kind:       "Secret",
        Name:       "foo",
    }
    secret := &corev1.Secret{}
    if err := controller.GetObjectByReference(ctx, client, ref, "shoot--test--foo", secret); err != nil {
        return err
    }
    // Use secret
    ...
```

Commit message:

Add support for `Seed` extensions (#11764)
* Add `extenions` to `Seed` API

* Add `resources` to `Seed` API

* Implement `reference` controller

* Adapt `reference` reconciler

Adapt `reference` reconciler to work with non-namespace resources.

* Enhance Auth Graph

* Copy resources to seed

* Adjust required extensions calculation

* Prepare `extension` component

Prepare `extension` component:
- Implement `DeployWaiter` interface to handle extensions independent from their configured lifecycle
- Enhance extension `Class` handling which must be considered in all deploy/wait/destroy/waitCleanup functions.
- Add Prefix option to prevent name clashes in the `garden` namespace between garden and seed extensions. Those usually happen if the garden runtime cluster is registered as a seed.

Please Note: This change adds the prefix `garden-` to all garden extensions.

* Move initialization to `shared` component package

* Introduce `seed` extension class

* Enhance `seed` controller

* Enhance `provider-local`

* Update Skaffold dependencies

* Update documentation

* Disable `GloballyEnabled` for seeds

The `GloballyEnabled` option must not be considered for seeds, as it would break compatibility with extensions that have not yet been adjusted.

More options for `GloballyEnabled` are expected soon.

* Update authz graph documentation

* Address review comments

docs/extensions/referenced-resources.md, after:

# Referenced Resources

`Shoot`s and `Seed`s can include a list of resources (usually secrets) that can be referenced by name in the extension `providerConfig` and other Shoot sections, for example:

```yaml
kind: Shoot
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
metadata:
  name: crazy-botany
  namespace: garden-dev
  ...
spec:
  ...
  extensions:
  - type: foobar
    providerConfig:
      apiVersion: foobar.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
      kind: FooBarConfig
      foo: bar
      secretRef: foobar-secret
  resources:
  - name: foobar-secret
    resourceRef:
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: Secret
      name: my-foobar-secret
```

Gardener expects these referenced resources to be located in the project namespace (e.g., `garden-dev`) for `Shoot`s and in the `garden` namespace for `Seed`s.
`Seed` resources are copied to the `garden` namespace in the seed cluster, while `Shoot` resources are copied to the control-plane namespace in the shoot cluster.
To avoid conflicts with other resources in the shoot, all resources in the seed are prefixed with a static value.

Extension controllers can resolve the references to these resources by accessing the Shoot via the `Cluster` resource. To properly read a referenced resources, extension controllers should use the utility function `GetObjectByReference` from the `extensions/pkg/controller` package, for example:

```go
    ...
    ref = &autoscalingv1.CrossVersionObjectReference{
        APIVersion: "v1",
        Kind:       "Secret",
        Name:       "foo",
    }
    secret := &corev1.Secret{}
    if err := controller.GetObjectByReference(ctx, client, ref, "shoot--test--foo", secret); err != nil {
        return err
    }
    // Use secret
    ...
```
