docs/usage/shoot/shoot_access.md, before:

---
title: Accessing Shoot Clusters
---

# Accessing Shoot Clusters

After creation of a shoot cluster, end-users require a `kubeconfig` to access it. There are several options available to get to such `kubeconfig`.

## `shoots/adminkubeconfig` Subresource

The [`shoots/adminkubeconfig`](../../proposals/16-adminkubeconfig-subresource.md) subresource allows users to dynamically generate temporary `kubeconfig`s that can be used to access shoot cluster with `cluster-admin` privileges. The credentials associated with this `kubeconfig` are client certificates which have a very short validity and must be renewed before they expire (by calling the subresource endpoint again).

The username associated with such `kubeconfig` will be the same which is used for authenticating to the Gardener API. Apart from this advantage, the created `kubeconfig` will not be persisted anywhere.

In order to request such a `kubeconfig`, you can run the following commands (targeting the garden cluster):

```bash
export NAMESPACE=garden-my-namespace
export SHOOT_NAME=my-shoot
export KUBECONFIG=<kubeconfig for garden cluster>  # can be set using "gardenctl target --garden <landscape>"
kubectl create \
    -f <(printf '{"spec":{"expirationSeconds":600}}') \
    --raw /apis/core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1/namespaces/${NAMESPACE}/shoots/${SHOOT_NAME}/adminkubeconfig | \
    jq -r ".status.kubeconfig" | \
    base64 -d
```

You also can use controller-runtime `client` (>= v0.14.3) to create such a kubeconfig from your go code like so:

```go
expiration := 10 * time.Minute
expirationSeconds := int64(expiration.Seconds())
adminKubeconfigRequest := &authenticationv1alpha1.AdminKubeconfigRequest{
  Spec: authenticationv1alpha1.AdminKubeconfigRequestSpec{
    ExpirationSeconds: &expirationSeconds,
  },
}
err := client.SubResource("adminkubeconfig").Create(ctx, shoot, adminKubeconfigRequest)
if err != nil {
  return err
}
config = adminKubeconfigRequest.Status.Kubeconfig
```

In Python, you can use the native [`kubernetes` client](https://github.com/kubernetes-client/python) to create such a kubeconfig like this:

```python
# This script first loads an existing kubeconfig from your system, and then sends a request to the Gardener API to create a new kubeconfig for a shoot cluster. 
# The received kubeconfig is then decoded and a new API client is created for interacting with the shoot cluster.

import base64
import json
from kubernetes import client, config
import yaml

# Set configuration options
shoot_name="my-shoot" # Name of the shoot
project_namespace="garden-my-namespace" # Namespace of the project

# Load kubeconfig from default ~/.kube/config
config.load_kube_config()
api = client.ApiClient()

# Create kubeconfig request
kubeconfig_request = {
    'apiVersion': 'authentication.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1',
    'kind': 'AdminKubeconfigRequest',
    'spec': {
      'expirationSeconds': 600
    }
}

response = api.call_api(resource_path=f'/apis/core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1/namespaces/{project_namespace}/shoots/{shoot_name}/adminkubeconfig',
                        method='POST',
                        body=kubeconfig_request,
                        auth_settings=['BearerToken'],
                        _preload_content=False,
                        _return_http_data_only=True,
                       )

decoded_kubeconfig = base64.b64decode(json.loads(response.data)["status"]["kubeconfig"]).decode('utf-8')
print(decoded_kubeconfig)

# Create an API client to interact with the shoot cluster
shoot_api_client = config.new_client_from_config_dict(yaml.safe_load(decoded_kubeconfig))
v1 = client.CoreV1Api(shoot_api_client)
```

> **Note:** The [`gardenctl-v2`](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl-v2) tool simplifies targeting shoot clusters. It automatically downloads a kubeconfig that uses the [gardenlogin](https://github.com/gardener/gardenlogin) kubectl auth plugin. This transparently manages authentication and certificate renewal without containing any credentials.

## `shoots/viewerkubeconfig` Subresource

The `shoots/viewerkubeconfig` subresource works similar to the [`shoots/adminkubeconfig`](#shootsadminkubeconfig-subresource).
The difference is that it returns a kubeconfig with read-only access for all APIs except the `core/v1.Secret` API and the resources which are specified in the `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.encryptionConfig` field in the Shoot (see [this document](../security/etcd_encryption_config.md)).

In order to request such a `kubeconfig`, you can run follow almost the same code as above - the only difference is that you need to use the `viewerkubeconfig` subresource.
For example, in bash this looks like this:

```bash
export NAMESPACE=garden-my-namespace
export SHOOT_NAME=my-shoot
kubectl create \
    -f <(printf '{"spec":{"expirationSeconds":600}}') \
    --raw /apis/core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1/namespaces/${NAMESPACE}/shoots/${SHOOT_NAME}/viewerkubeconfig | \
    jq -r ".status.kubeconfig" | \
    base64 -d
```

The examples for other programming languages are similar to [the above](#shootsadminkubeconfig-subresource) and can be adapted accordingly.

## OpenID Connect

> **Note:** OpenID Connect is deprecated in favor of [Structured Authentication configuration](#structured-authentication). Setting OpenID Connect configurations is forbidden for clusters with Kubernetes version `>= 1.32`

The `kube-apiserver` of shoot clusters can be provided with [OpenID Connect configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#openid-connect-tokens) via the Shoot spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
...
spec:
  kubernetes:
    oidcConfig:
      ...
```

It is the end-user's responsibility to incorporate the OpenID Connect configurations in the `kubeconfig` for accessing the cluster (i.e., Gardener will not automatically generate the `kubeconfig` based on these OIDC settings).
The recommended way is using the `kubectl` plugin called [`kubectl oidc-login`](https://github.com/int128/kubelogin) for OIDC authentication.

If you want to use the same OIDC configuration for all your shoots by default, then you can use the `ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset` and `OpenIDConnectPreset` API resources. They allow defaulting the `.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` fields for newly created `Shoot`s such that you don't have to repeat yourself every time (similar to `PodPreset` resources in Kubernetes).
`ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset` specified OIDC configuration applies to `Projects` and `Shoots` cluster-wide (hence, only available to Gardener operators), while `OpenIDConnectPreset` is `Project`-scoped.
Shoots have to "opt-in" for such defaulting by using the `oidc=enable` label.

For further information on `(Cluster)OpenIDConnectPreset`, refer to [ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset and OpenIDConnectPreset](../security/openidconnect-presets.md).

For shoots with Kubernetes version `>= 1.30`, which have `StructuredAuthenticationConfiguration` feature gate enabled (enabled by default), it is advised to use Structured Authentication instead of configuring `.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig`.
If `oidcConfig` is configured, it is translated into an `AuthenticationConfiguration` file to use for [Structured Authentication configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#using-authentication-configuration)

## Structured Authentication

For shoots with Kubernetes version `>= 1.30`, which have `StructuredAuthenticationConfiguration` feature gate enabled (enabled by default), `kube-apiserver` of shoot clusters can be provided with [Structured Authentication configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#using-authentication-configuration) via the Shoot spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
...
spec:
  kubernetes:
    kubeAPIServer:
      structuredAuthentication:
        configMapName: name-of-configmap-containing-authentication-config
```

The `configMapName` references a user created `ConfigMap` in the project namespace containing the `AuthenticationConfiguration` in it's `config.yaml` data field.
Here is an example of such `ConfigMap`:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: name-of-configmap-containing-authentication-config
  namespace: garden-my-project
data:
  config.yaml: |
    apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: AuthenticationConfiguration
    jwt:
    - issuer:
        url: https://issuer1.example.com
        audiences:
        - audience1
        - audience2
      claimMappings:
        username:
          expression: 'claims.username'
        groups:
          expression: 'claims.groups'
        uid:
          expression: 'claims.uid'
      claimValidationRules:
        expression: 'claims.hd == "example.com"'
        message: "the hosted domain name must be example.com"
```

The user is responsible for the validity of the configured `JWTAuthenticator`s.
Be aware that changing the configuration in the `ConfigMap` will be applied in the next `Shoot` reconciliation, but this is not automatically triggered.
If you want the changes to roll out immediately, [trigger a reconciliation explicitly](../shoot-operations/shoot_operations.md#immediate-reconciliation).

## Structured Authorization

For shoots with Kubernetes version `>= 1.30`, which have `StructuredAuthorizationConfiguration` feature gate enabled (enabled by default), `kube-apiserver` of shoot clusters can be provided with [Structured Authorization configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authorization/#using-configuration-file-for-authorization) via the Shoot spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
...
spec:
  kubernetes:
    kubeAPIServer:
      structuredAuthorization:
        configMapName: name-of-configmap-containing-authorization-config
        kubeconfigs:
        - authorizerName: my-webhook
          secretName: webhook-kubeconfig
```

The `configMapName` references a user created `ConfigMap` in the project namespace containing the `AuthorizationConfiguration` in it's `config.yaml` data field.
Here is an example of such `ConfigMap`:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: name-of-configmap-containing-authorization-config
  namespace: garden-my-project
data:
  config.yaml: |
    apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: AuthorizationConfiguration
    authorizers:
    - type: Webhook
      name: my-webhook
      webhook:
        timeout: 3s
        subjectAccessReviewVersion: v1
        matchConditionSubjectAccessReviewVersion: v1
        failurePolicy: Deny
        matchConditions:
        - expression: request.resourceAttributes.namespace == 'kube-system'
```

In addition, it is required to provide a `Secret` for each authorizer.
This `Secret` should contain a kubeconfig with the server address of the webhook server, and optionally credentials for authentication:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: webhook-kubeconfig
  namespace: garden-my-project
data:
  kubeconfig: <base64-encoded-kubeconfig-for-authz-webhook>
```

The user is responsible for the validity of the configured authorizers.
Be aware that changing the configuration in the `ConfigMap` will be applied in the next `Shoot` reconciliation, but this is not automatically triggered.
If you want the changes to roll out immediately, [trigger a reconciliation explicitly](../shoot-operations/shoot_operations.md#immediate-reconciliation).

> [!NOTE]
> You can have one or more authorizers of type `Webhook` (no other types are supported).
>
> You are not allowed to specify the `authorizers[].webhook.connectionInfo` field.
> Instead, as mentioned above, provide a kubeconfig file containing the server address (and optionally, credentials that can be used by `kube-apiserver` in order to authenticate with the webhook server) by creating a `Secret` containing the kubeconfig (in the `.data.kubeconfig` key).
> Reference this `Secret` by adding it to `.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.structuredAuthorization.kubeconfigs[]` (choose the proper `authorizerName`, see example above).

Be aware of the fact that all webhook authorizers are added only after the `RBAC`/`Node` authorizers.
Hence, if RBAC already allows a request, your webhook authorizer might not get called.

Commit message:

Write seed-specific `Shoot` endpoint served with the control plane wildcard certificate into `.status.advertisedAddresses` (#11612)
* Documentation

* Augment advertised addresses with wildcard TLS endpoint

* Generate kubeconfigs with `Cluster` using wildcard TLS endpoint

* Do not default the server CA to the signing CA of the certificate

This code only works under the assumption that the signing CA of the
certificate is the same as the one for the server.

This was introduced 3y ago with
https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/5524/commits/039631fb7fe79398d18882f4810a01d949d6016b
when this was the case for Shoots.

Since a longer time, however, we have introduced a dedicated client CA
for shoots, i.e., this defaulting never works in our case.
Let's remove it and rely on the CA data being properly provided via the
`KubeConfigRequest` struct.

* Address PR review feedback

docs/usage/shoot/shoot_access.md, after:

---
title: Accessing Shoot Clusters
---

# Accessing Shoot Clusters

After creation of a shoot cluster, end-users require a `kubeconfig` to access it. There are several options available to get to such `kubeconfig`.

## `shoots/adminkubeconfig` Subresource

The [`shoots/adminkubeconfig`](../../proposals/16-adminkubeconfig-subresource.md) subresource allows users to dynamically generate temporary `kubeconfig`s that can be used to access shoot cluster with `cluster-admin` privileges. The credentials associated with this `kubeconfig` are client certificates which have a very short validity and must be renewed before they expire (by calling the subresource endpoint again).

The username associated with such `kubeconfig` will be the same which is used for authenticating to the Gardener API. Apart from this advantage, the created `kubeconfig` will not be persisted anywhere.

In order to request such a `kubeconfig`, you can run the following commands (targeting the garden cluster):

```bash
export NAMESPACE=garden-my-namespace
export SHOOT_NAME=my-shoot
export KUBECONFIG=<kubeconfig for garden cluster>  # can be set using "gardenctl target --garden <landscape>"
kubectl create \
    -f <(printf '{"spec":{"expirationSeconds":600}}') \
    --raw /apis/core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1/namespaces/${NAMESPACE}/shoots/${SHOOT_NAME}/adminkubeconfig | \
    jq -r ".status.kubeconfig" | \
    base64 -d
```

You also can use controller-runtime `client` (>= v0.14.3) to create such a kubeconfig from your go code like so:

```go
expiration := 10 * time.Minute
expirationSeconds := int64(expiration.Seconds())
adminKubeconfigRequest := &authenticationv1alpha1.AdminKubeconfigRequest{
  Spec: authenticationv1alpha1.AdminKubeconfigRequestSpec{
    ExpirationSeconds: &expirationSeconds,
  },
}
err := client.SubResource("adminkubeconfig").Create(ctx, shoot, adminKubeconfigRequest)
if err != nil {
  return err
}
config = adminKubeconfigRequest.Status.Kubeconfig
```

In Python, you can use the native [`kubernetes` client](https://github.com/kubernetes-client/python) to create such a kubeconfig like this:

```python
# This script first loads an existing kubeconfig from your system, and then sends a request to the Gardener API to create a new kubeconfig for a shoot cluster. 
# The received kubeconfig is then decoded and a new API client is created for interacting with the shoot cluster.

import base64
import json
from kubernetes import client, config
import yaml

# Set configuration options
shoot_name="my-shoot" # Name of the shoot
project_namespace="garden-my-namespace" # Namespace of the project

# Load kubeconfig from default ~/.kube/config
config.load_kube_config()
api = client.ApiClient()

# Create kubeconfig request
kubeconfig_request = {
    'apiVersion': 'authentication.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1',
    'kind': 'AdminKubeconfigRequest',
    'spec': {
      'expirationSeconds': 600
    }
}

response = api.call_api(resource_path=f'/apis/core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1/namespaces/{project_namespace}/shoots/{shoot_name}/adminkubeconfig',
                        method='POST',
                        body=kubeconfig_request,
                        auth_settings=['BearerToken'],
                        _preload_content=False,
                        _return_http_data_only=True,
                       )

decoded_kubeconfig = base64.b64decode(json.loads(response.data)["status"]["kubeconfig"]).decode('utf-8')
print(decoded_kubeconfig)

# Create an API client to interact with the shoot cluster
shoot_api_client = config.new_client_from_config_dict(yaml.safe_load(decoded_kubeconfig))
v1 = client.CoreV1Api(shoot_api_client)
```

> **Note:** The [`gardenctl-v2`](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl-v2) tool simplifies targeting shoot clusters. It automatically downloads a kubeconfig that uses the [gardenlogin](https://github.com/gardener/gardenlogin) kubectl auth plugin. This transparently manages authentication and certificate renewal without containing any credentials.

## `shoots/viewerkubeconfig` Subresource

The `shoots/viewerkubeconfig` subresource works similar to the [`shoots/adminkubeconfig`](#shootsadminkubeconfig-subresource).
The difference is that it returns a kubeconfig with read-only access for all APIs except the `core/v1.Secret` API and the resources which are specified in the `spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.encryptionConfig` field in the Shoot (see [this document](../security/etcd_encryption_config.md)).

In order to request such a `kubeconfig`, you can run follow almost the same code as above - the only difference is that you need to use the `viewerkubeconfig` subresource.
For example, in bash this looks like this:

```bash
export NAMESPACE=garden-my-namespace
export SHOOT_NAME=my-shoot
kubectl create \
    -f <(printf '{"spec":{"expirationSeconds":600}}') \
    --raw /apis/core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1/namespaces/${NAMESPACE}/shoots/${SHOOT_NAME}/viewerkubeconfig | \
    jq -r ".status.kubeconfig" | \
    base64 -d
```

The examples for other programming languages are similar to [the above](#shootsadminkubeconfig-subresource) and can be adapted accordingly.

> [!TIP]
> If the Gardener operator has configured a ["control plane wildcard certificate"](../../operations/trusted-tls-for-control-planes.md#register-a-trusted-wildcard-certificate), the issued kubeconfigs have a dedicated `Cluster` entry containing an endpoint that is served with this wildcard certificate.
> This could be a generally trusted certificate, e.g. from [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org) or a similar certificate authority, i.e., it does not require you to specify the certificate authority bundle.
>
> ⚠️ This endpoint is specific to the seed cluster your `Shoot` is scheduled to, i.e., if the seed cluster changes (`.spec.seedName`, for example because of a [control plane migration](../../operations/control_plane_migration.md)), the endpoint changes as well. Have this in mind in case you consider using it!

## OpenID Connect

> **Note:** OpenID Connect is deprecated in favor of [Structured Authentication configuration](#structured-authentication). Setting OpenID Connect configurations is forbidden for clusters with Kubernetes version `>= 1.32`

The `kube-apiserver` of shoot clusters can be provided with [OpenID Connect configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#openid-connect-tokens) via the Shoot spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
...
spec:
  kubernetes:
    oidcConfig:
      ...
```

It is the end-user's responsibility to incorporate the OpenID Connect configurations in the `kubeconfig` for accessing the cluster (i.e., Gardener will not automatically generate the `kubeconfig` based on these OIDC settings).
The recommended way is using the `kubectl` plugin called [`kubectl oidc-login`](https://github.com/int128/kubelogin) for OIDC authentication.

If you want to use the same OIDC configuration for all your shoots by default, then you can use the `ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset` and `OpenIDConnectPreset` API resources. They allow defaulting the `.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig` fields for newly created `Shoot`s such that you don't have to repeat yourself every time (similar to `PodPreset` resources in Kubernetes).
`ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset` specified OIDC configuration applies to `Projects` and `Shoots` cluster-wide (hence, only available to Gardener operators), while `OpenIDConnectPreset` is `Project`-scoped.
Shoots have to "opt-in" for such defaulting by using the `oidc=enable` label.

For further information on `(Cluster)OpenIDConnectPreset`, refer to [ClusterOpenIDConnectPreset and OpenIDConnectPreset](../security/openidconnect-presets.md).

For shoots with Kubernetes version `>= 1.30`, which have `StructuredAuthenticationConfiguration` feature gate enabled (enabled by default), it is advised to use Structured Authentication instead of configuring `.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.oidcConfig`.
If `oidcConfig` is configured, it is translated into an `AuthenticationConfiguration` file to use for [Structured Authentication configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#using-authentication-configuration)

## Structured Authentication

For shoots with Kubernetes version `>= 1.30`, which have `StructuredAuthenticationConfiguration` feature gate enabled (enabled by default), `kube-apiserver` of shoot clusters can be provided with [Structured Authentication configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#using-authentication-configuration) via the Shoot spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
...
spec:
  kubernetes:
    kubeAPIServer:
      structuredAuthentication:
        configMapName: name-of-configmap-containing-authentication-config
```

The `configMapName` references a user created `ConfigMap` in the project namespace containing the `AuthenticationConfiguration` in it's `config.yaml` data field.
Here is an example of such `ConfigMap`:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: name-of-configmap-containing-authentication-config
  namespace: garden-my-project
data:
  config.yaml: |
    apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: AuthenticationConfiguration
    jwt:
    - issuer:
        url: https://issuer1.example.com
        audiences:
        - audience1
        - audience2
      claimMappings:
        username:
          expression: 'claims.username'
        groups:
          expression: 'claims.groups'
        uid:
          expression: 'claims.uid'
      claimValidationRules:
        expression: 'claims.hd == "example.com"'
        message: "the hosted domain name must be example.com"
```

The user is responsible for the validity of the configured `JWTAuthenticator`s.
Be aware that changing the configuration in the `ConfigMap` will be applied in the next `Shoot` reconciliation, but this is not automatically triggered.
If you want the changes to roll out immediately, [trigger a reconciliation explicitly](../shoot-operations/shoot_operations.md#immediate-reconciliation).

## Structured Authorization

For shoots with Kubernetes version `>= 1.30`, which have `StructuredAuthorizationConfiguration` feature gate enabled (enabled by default), `kube-apiserver` of shoot clusters can be provided with [Structured Authorization configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authorization/#using-configuration-file-for-authorization) via the Shoot spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
...
spec:
  kubernetes:
    kubeAPIServer:
      structuredAuthorization:
        configMapName: name-of-configmap-containing-authorization-config
        kubeconfigs:
        - authorizerName: my-webhook
          secretName: webhook-kubeconfig
```

The `configMapName` references a user created `ConfigMap` in the project namespace containing the `AuthorizationConfiguration` in it's `config.yaml` data field.
Here is an example of such `ConfigMap`:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: name-of-configmap-containing-authorization-config
  namespace: garden-my-project
data:
  config.yaml: |
    apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: AuthorizationConfiguration
    authorizers:
    - type: Webhook
      name: my-webhook
      webhook:
        timeout: 3s
        subjectAccessReviewVersion: v1
        matchConditionSubjectAccessReviewVersion: v1
        failurePolicy: Deny
        matchConditions:
        - expression: request.resourceAttributes.namespace == 'kube-system'
```

In addition, it is required to provide a `Secret` for each authorizer.
This `Secret` should contain a kubeconfig with the server address of the webhook server, and optionally credentials for authentication:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: webhook-kubeconfig
  namespace: garden-my-project
data:
  kubeconfig: <base64-encoded-kubeconfig-for-authz-webhook>
```

The user is responsible for the validity of the configured authorizers.
Be aware that changing the configuration in the `ConfigMap` will be applied in the next `Shoot` reconciliation, but this is not automatically triggered.
If you want the changes to roll out immediately, [trigger a reconciliation explicitly](../shoot-operations/shoot_operations.md#immediate-reconciliation).

> [!NOTE]
> You can have one or more authorizers of type `Webhook` (no other types are supported).
>
> You are not allowed to specify the `authorizers[].webhook.connectionInfo` field.
> Instead, as mentioned above, provide a kubeconfig file containing the server address (and optionally, credentials that can be used by `kube-apiserver` in order to authenticate with the webhook server) by creating a `Secret` containing the kubeconfig (in the `.data.kubeconfig` key).
> Reference this `Secret` by adding it to `.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.structuredAuthorization.kubeconfigs[]` (choose the proper `authorizerName`, see example above).

Be aware of the fact that all webhook authorizers are added only after the `RBAC`/`Node` authorizers.
Hence, if RBAC already allows a request, your webhook authorizer might not get called.
